We appreciate the numerous very helpful suggestions and we are pleased to report that we have been able to respond to all of them. We thank the reviewer and the editors for their helpful comments on our manuscript “Legal, political science and economics approaches to measuring malapportionment: The U.S. House, the Senate and the Electoral College 1790-2010” (SSQ-2020-0090). The paper has been greatly improved both in overall quality and to clarify the contribution of the paper in context of the literature. In what follows we detail the changes we have made in response to the conscientious and helpful remarks of the reviewer. We may not have the space to exhaustively explore every suggestion, but this new draft is a good faith effort to respond without adding undue length or to write an entirely new paper. 

The reviewer’s point about our use of the term “historical” data is well taken. We have changed historical to “time-series” to reflect that, though we are using real historical population data (and institution sizes), our choices in how to calculate malapportionment render it ahistorical in some respects. 

The reviewers observation about the three-fifths clause is one we completely agree with, and we now create a more realistic “historical” time-series by calculating the House and the EC by counting non-free persons as three-fifths until 1870, when we begin to use total population for our calculations. We continue to use only the Hill-Huntington method of apportionment, however, as to maximize comparability over time. The choice of apportionment method matters more for determining which state(s) get the last CDs, but has little to no effect on the measures of malapportionment. So this choice is one of convenience and reflects our desire to “keep things simple”. 

We have now added a conclusion which offers two upshots. (1) the choice of measure depends on the intended use and (2) we prefer the use the population required to reach a majority over all the others, since it does not focus on just two constituencies, because it is comparable across jurisdictions and over times, and is easy to interpret for non-specialists. We hope this conclusion section creates a more satisfactory ending and is more in line with the expectations we give at the beginning of the paper and in the abstract.

The idea of doing simulations on a toy dataset is intriguing, but we feel that would be more appropriate in a paper that explicitly compares the axiomatic properties of the different measures, something we have shied away from. The focus is instead on the differences between institutions, and how different measures lead to different conclusions.

We added appropriate citations to Edelman. We are very grateful for the reviewer for this reference, which was particularly useful as a citation to justify the inclusion of the legal metrics and to point out that the court had no objective function in mind when choosing it.

We have clarified the different standards of deviations between types of legislatures the courts have set. We have additionally referenced the court cases the reviewers has graciously alerted us to, which helps to better understand the difference between inter-state and intra-state malapportionment. We additionally have added reference to Ladewig (2011), a very important law review article regarding the constitutional requirements of equal population. (We were also quite surprised by the statement that in 2010 “The levels of interstate malapportionment are over 9,000% greater than the levels of intrastate malapportionment already found unconstitutional.”!

The lack of common vocabulary frustrated at least one of the present authors as well as the reviewer. We have added footnotes which lists all the alternative names we could find in the literature for the different measures, but the truth is there probably are many more that people are using (sometimes very incorrectly; even courts use different terms to refer to the same measure). We like the term Voter Equivalency Ratio and have replaced it for our max/min measure.

We have added a new Table, titled “District Deviation Summaries for the U.S. House, Senate, and Electoral College” to give some descriptive data for the numbers we use throughout the paper. Though it does not allow for calculating measures that need every district population, it does allow for measuring those that use the largest and smallest, as well as Total Population Deviation. We have replicated all of our results to try and isolate the potential error in the Loosemore-hanby calculations but came to the same answers. We also tested the equation using a toy example and obtained the correct outputs. 

We are very grateful for the reviewer pointing out that D. C. possibly could have more than three Electors in the future, something we were not aware of. We have now addd this to a footnote in the text.

We have replaced “cyclical pattern” with “vary over time” since we are not arguing that it should naturally cycle. 

The reviewer’s sixth point is one we have clarified in the conclusion, since they bring up a very important point. Moreover, we have used this to show why the max/min measure is unreliable for measuring different legislatures, and that although the “max” can go up towards infinity for the Senate, it can not do that for either the House or the EC. This turns out to shape the conclusions we can make from the Max/Min measure in a way that makes it unreliable.

We have added the necessary citation to Neubauer and Zeitlin about the House size affecting the 2000 election.

We hope the new titles for Figures 1 and 2 offer more clarity now.

We hope that the changes found in this draft help to alleviate the concerns of the reviewer, offer a more satisfactory conclusion, and now contribution to the existing literature in a more clearer and more precise way. 